\def{title}{Good-Bad Go}
# Go is a good-bad language

Date: 2025-07-02

I should preface this by stating that I'm still fairly new to Go.
This is more a novice's first impressions than the opinion of someone who
knows what they're talking about. That aside,

### What do I mean by this?

I don't really mean that Go has some nice parts and some bad parts.
That's true, but it's also true of every language ever.

Instead, I mean that Go has features that are simultaneously good and bad.

For example, returning NULL (well, technically nil, but whatever). Returning
NULL is, in my view, fundamentally kinda flawed. 

You automatically lose the ability to be relatively certain the code won't
panic somewhere random, something you'd usually get with sum types and pattern
matching (unless you're doing Haskell, where forgetting a branch of a pattern
match is the bane of my existence).

But, it's convenient and readable. Yeah, Haskell has monads and Rust has
the `?` operator, but I always have to think for two seconds about the flow
of the code with either of those. (Maybe this is a skill issue.)
The `if result == nil` check after calling a function is more readable, at the
cost of being more verbose.
I don't have to think, I know what it does.

And, in any case, in Rust, you'd probably need a match or if-let expression if
the error does anything more than return back up the call stack. Your code is
just as ugly. Haskell shares a similar flaw, although, if you're creative with
monads you can alleviate this somewhat.

I mean this when I call Go good-bad. It takes the easy, obvious, 
less-than-optimal route because fuck it. 
If you wanted "proper" code you'd pick another language.

Yeah, goroutines run concurrently, and you'll occasionally have to throw some
mutexes around your code, costing you performance.
Theoretically, you could use a more traditional, epoll/kqueue style polling
approach, which might obviate the need for those mutexes. 

But, that's incredibly annoying to do, and realistically it won't be *that*
much faster.

Yeah, all the files in a directory get put in the same package, without 
namespacing.

But hey, there's no includes or module declarations necessary, and you probably
weren't going to have name collisions anyways.

There is a garbage collector, which isn't optimal, but at least I don't have
to remember to free things, write the destructor correctly, or get yelled at
by a strict type system.

These sorts of things are awesome from an ergonomics perspective, even if not
great from a theoretical what-can-I-guarantee-about-this-code perspective.

Certainly, you can write more performant code in other languages, with stronger
guarantees about runtime safety, but do you really want to? Is it going to be
worth the time you'll spend on it? Probably not.
