\def{title}{Software Licenses}
# An exploration of software licenses

Date: 2025-07-30\\
Edited: 2025-08-08

I've had to explain software licensing to a few people, so I thought I'd make
a short rundown of the topic.

I'm not a lawyer and this isn't legal advice.

---

## Why do I need a license?

If you don't provide a license for your software, it's assumed to be under
your copyright, and nobody can legally use or modify it.

If you want people to use your code, you have to explicitly tell them where
and when they can use it. This is what software licenses do.

## What types of licenses are there?

Say you write some code, and PuppyKiller Corp. Inc. wants to distribute
software that is either a modification of or depends on your software.
Are you:

### Fine with them using your code, regardless of whether their final product is proprietary

Check out permissive licenses, like the Unlicense, MIT License, and Apache 2.0
licenses. The main difference between these is the Unlicense doesn't
require users of your code to provide any attribution, while the MIT and Apache
licenses require users to include a license disclaimer with your code.

The Apache license also includes provisions to prevent patent trolls from
contributing patented code and making your life hell. If your project
accepts contributions it's probably the best pick.

### Fine with them using your code, so long as they distribute any modifications they make

Check out weak-copyleft licenses, like the MPL and LGPL. The MPL requires
anyone who distributes compiled versions of your code to distribute any changes
they've made to it, and the LGPL requires that proprietary software
using your code allows end users to change your code and relink new versions
of it with the proprietary software.

If you're shipping a library intended to be dynamically linked with other code or it's otherwise important to you that end users be able to replace your code, go with the LGPL. Otherwise, go with the MPL.

### Fine with them using your code, but only if they also open-source their code

Check out strong-copyleft licenses, like the GPL and AGPL. The GPL requires
anyone who uses your code in a project to distribute the source code for their
project under the GPL as well, and the AGPL extends this to services running
remotely on another machine.

Effectively, if PuppyKiller Corp. Inc. runs modified versions of your code on
their servers and sends the result to their users, the GPL wouldn't require
them to let users see the source code for those modifications, but the AGPL
would.

### Not writing code, but writing documentation or some other creative work

Check out the
[Creative Commons](https://creativecommons.org/share-your-work/cclicenses/)
licenses. The CC BY is analogous to the MIT or Apache 2.0 licenses, the
CC BY SA is analogous to the GPL, and the CC 0 is similar to the Unlicense.
There are also other CC licenses preventing derivative works or commercial
usage if that's your preference, but those licenses do somewhat go against
the ethos of free/open-source software so they won't be covered in detail here.

## How to apply a license

Check out the webpage of the organization associated with the license for
specifics, or just google.

Generally though, you should include a file named LICENSE or COPYING in the
top directory of your project that contains the text of your desired license.
Also, include an [SPDX-License-Identifier](https://spdx.org/licenses/) in
each source file.

