\def{title}{Proxying HTTP sucks}

# Proxying HTTP sucks
#### yeah, that title is a bit hyperbolic
###### but i have your attention now don't i

Date: 13 Germinal 234

Oh, don't get me wrong, it (or something like it) is completely necessary.
Practically speaking, you're going to have to throw nginx or something similar
out front of whatever backend applications you're running. It makes TLS easier,
and you'll need to do it anyways if you want to host different subdomains, or
if you want to put different projects under one single domain, or if you need
to do load balancing, or if you want to have redundant servers... you get the
point.

No, my beef is with the idea that the reverse proxy has to be HTTP. HTTP is
[complicated][rfc-9110]. [Really][rfc-9111], [really][rfc-9112],
[complicated][rfc-9113]. I don't personally see this as an inherent flaw with
the protocol (well, except for HTTP/1.1, which should simply not be used seeing
as text-based protocols are difficult to parse correctly). It's mostly a thing
that kinda happens to any suitably old, suitably generic network protocol. TCP
has the same thing going on.

Because HTTP is complicated, if you want to process HTTP requests, you
probably need to use some big HTTP server library, which is a nontrivial
dependency; it's gonna have its own potential flaws and security
vulnerabilities. Yes, some languages have incorporated an HTTP server into
their standard library, but the same principle still applies; the language
itself is a dependency. Further, this extra complexity and vulnerability is
*in addition to* the complexity already in a proper HTTP server, like nginx.
Again, you'll need to have nginx running already, there is no eliminating that
dependency (unless you opt to roll-your-own-nginx of course).

However. Most of the things you're gonna use HTTP for are simple. In the case of
some CRUD app, you accept requests that will themselves undergo a little bit
of processing, and maybe you do stuff with a database. For a git server, you
query a git repo, and return a page with the info the user asked for. There's
no reason you should have to take on an unnecessary heavy dependency for that.
And yet, many projects do.

Ideally, instead of proxying regular HTTP, and dealing with its complexities,
we could let the reverse-proxy server do the hard part for us, and have it just
send us some simple binary protocol that's easy to parse, or communicate the
relevant information from the request in some other nice way. That would avoid
embedding an entire HTTP server in the application. And it wouldn't require
that we have an extra dependency, except for the reverse-proxy server, which,
again, is unavoidable; we will always be stuck with it.

Fortunately, such things exist. The earliest, and most basic, was [CGI][cgi].
CGI has the HTTP server fork and exec some CGI script, which itself gets
passed data about the HTTP request through environment variables. It reads the
request body through standard input, and responds through standard output. Once
it's done, it exits. Overall it quite elegantly solves the issue of not
wanting to embed an HTTP server in everything. Some software still uses CGI,
like [cgit][cgit], and it works perfectly well.

To be clear, CGI is imperfect. Creating a new process for every request is
simple, but is of course a bit inefficient. And, the creation and destruction
of a process for each request means that maintaining persistent state across
requests is more annoying. Further, if you want to separate the proxy and the
backend application and run them on different machines, you can't easily do
that.

To fix these flaws, yet more protocols were created. Two of note are
[FCGI][fcgi] and [SCGI][scgi]. Both effectively turn HTTP into a
much-easier-to-parse protocol, and then message the backend application using
that protocol. You could write an SCGI parser in like, less than an hour, and
FCGI might take only a bit longer.

SCGI is probably closest to the idea of HTTP-but-easy-to-parse; it opens a new
socket for each connection and just sends the important info to the
user-implemented backend process. It's also at least somewhat human-readable
(without, as best I can tell, coming with a lot of the annoyances HTTP tends
to have, though I do still much prefer binary protocols for their ease of
parsing).

FCGI is a bit different; its protocol multiplexes many connections over a
single socket, and it's a proper binary protocol. This of course makes it
slightly more complex, but, but it's also simpler in some ways. The binary
protocol does sacrifice readability, but it gains ease of parsing; I see this
as a worthy tradeoff. The usage of a single socket obviates most of the need
for the backend application to use efficient system-dependent async IO
facilities. Just blocking on the socket directly or maybe using `poll(2)` if
you have a few other connections to worry about is probably going to be
plenty performant. I overall like it better than SCGI, but I could see
arguments for SCGI as well; maybe it's easier to port an HTTP application to
SCGI.

And so I'm kinda left wondering, why have the \*CGIs fallen out of fashion?
I assume it's because, despite the extra complexity of HTTP, proxying HTTP is
seen as more flexible; you can run it without a proxy. But is it really more
flexible? I contend that in most situations you will be proxying through a
server anyways, and in most of the ones where you otherwise wouldn't proxy,
a proxy running locally on the same machine is just not enough of a
performance hit to be worth caring about. Perhaps it's simply folks being
unaware of the existence of the \*CGIs? Or not wanting to learn a different
protocol? I genuinely don't know.

I could also be looking at this from a systems-programmer-centric point of
view. When I think of implementing a backend, I jump to "let's write something
simple in C," and that is not exactly a common approach, perhaps with good
reason. Maybe people more used to higher-level languages simply don't see the
need to obsessively simplify things. But hey, I like C, and if I'm writing
software in my free time I'm going to do it in a way that is fun.

[rfc-9110]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9110
[rfc-9111]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9111
[rfc-9112]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9112
[rfc-9113]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9113
[cgit]: https://git.zx2c4.com/cgit/
[fcgi]: https://fast-cgi.github.io/spec
[cgi]: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3875.html
[scgi]: https://python.ca/scgi/protocol.txt

