\def{title}{Operating systems suck}

# a rant about operating systems

Date: 1 Germinal 234

Gods, writing [libiosys][0], my cross-platform system IO facility wrapper has
been significantly more tedious than expected. And so you get this
stream-of-consciousness rant about... well, read on!

I could blame this entirely on Windows, and don't get me wrong, Win32 shares
a significant portion of the blame here. But I don't want to do that entirely.
Part of this is just the inevitable result of porting between two different
systems with two very different underlying philosophies.

However, a little bit of Windows-bashing goes a long way. So I might as well
complain about the Win32 documentation.

It has a lot of the same sort of issue as Rust runs into. The broad nature of
the API is fleshed out, but the corner cases are just not explained properly.
Maybe this is just a me-problem but with both it's pretty common for me to
wonder about the details of some particular call and then spend an hour trying
to figure out what the damned thing actually does.

Because of POSIX, Unix systems mostly have this solved. POSIX is an IEEE
standard, and so these sorts of edge cases and "but what if..." questions are
usually elaborated upon, because the whole thing actually went through a
standards committee at some point. It helps to know that every word there is
intentional.

Or maybe this is just some sort of cognitive bias, I'm a lot more familiar
with POSIX than Win32 admittedly. Not by so much, but still. And I spend a lot
more time in C than I do Rust.

Another rant.

It's infuriating how the different operating systems have such different
permissions models. I cannot think of a good way to map Unix permissions onto
Windows, other than to just assume permissions are the same for all users.

Quite honestly I feel like agreeing with an ancient [Brian Will][1] video that
OS permissions should be mostly done away with. But I'm nowhere near qualified
enough to make that determination.

This all does give me ideas for when I eventually decide to write an OS. My
eventual goal over the course of... who knows how many years is to host this
site on solely my own software stack, going down to the kernel and bootloader.
Contributions welcome, of course, but I have to satiate my Not Invented Here
syndrome a little bit, y'know? Like, this is obviously pointless, but just
because it's a waste of time doesn't mean it can't also be an interesting
waste of time.

In this hypothetical OS, I think most system calls should be handled via some
sort of queueing mechanism, like Linux's [io_uring][2]. Batching syscalls
results in fewer context switches and is genuinely no less convenient
sometimes, I feel strongly that it's the future.

I also like a lot of things from Plan 9. `rfork` is a great idea, and a clean
way to unify processes and threads. Quite generally I think Plan 9 is a great
solution to a nonexistent problem. Don't take this as negative, I think it's
a darn cool OS, it's just that the idea of a networked filesystem isn't really
the way tech ended up going. In any case there is still plenty to learn from
it; in a lot of ways it's a Unix-done-right.

I should also probably think about networking-specific features for this
thing. Maybe a sort of microkernel-y approach could work there, delegate
anything above IP packets to userspace. Could be slower, but with an io_uring
style event queue, maybe not by that much?

You then run into the issue of, how do you route a given packet to a given
process? I suppose if you have a proper IPC mechanism it's not a problem, but
the network stack would have to probably run with whatever goes for elevated
permissions since it could read all packets.

[0]: https://codeberg.org/chickenspaceprogram/libiosys
[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L9v4Mg8wi4U
[2]: https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/io_uring.7.html
