\def{title}{Preprocessors don't suck}

# Preprocessors don't suck

Date: 11 Flor&eacute;al 234

Well, it depends on what you use them for.

If it's as a kludgy substitute for your language's lack of generics
(\*cough\* C), yeah, preprocessors kinda suck. I mean, better a preprocessor
than no preprocessor, but clearly suboptimal.

Honestly I don't see how a first-party preprocessor like `cpp` can be good.
For a full programming language, any preprocessor usecases can usually be done
better by just, making something into a language feature.

Third-party code preprocessors I can understand; you have a specific goal in
mind, and a language to achieve it in, but you need to hack on additional
features. They are still fundamentally a kludge, but maybe a necessary kludge.
A stopgap for when a language feature isn't there yet.

Where preprocessors don't suck is as an intermediate between markup languages
and full programming languages. Most markup languages don't natively support
things like compiletime file inclusion, definition of new keywords, and such.
Further, writing them tends to be very repetitive and annoying (particularly
anything XML-based). The latter can be fixed with lighter-weight languages,
like Markdown, but the former is kinda an inherent flaw. An entirely sensible
flaw; you can't sensibly include something at build-time if it's to be sent
over the wire as-is, there's simply no build-time to speak of! But, still a
flaw.

To counteract this flaw, you realistically have to use some external
site-generator tool to build your markdown website that will have its own
syntax and way of doing things. And I won't lie to you, even the best
preprocessor will still require this. But, with a good preprocessor, your
external tool can just be a makefile, or a shell script. Nothing complicated,
and your choice of language doesn't tie you down to a choice of associated
tooling.

This is because macros are a great middleground between actual programming
languages and raw markup languages. A good preprocessor tool can function as a
markdown-replacement, compiling into HTML or whatever yet still having a
decent syntax. It also takes over much of the function of a site generator.
You can just implement things with macros. Yes, it's a bit ugly, but it's
significantly more flexible and powerful. You can effectively modify the
language itself trivially, and a lot of the "code" parts are interspersed with
the "content" parts, which makes it a bit easier to see what's going on.
Need to copy-paste some annoying segment of raw-HTML that Markdown or whatever
doesn't support? Just define a macro for it.

Unfortunately, most of the preprocessors I've come across aren't targeted
towards this sort of hackable-markup language. They're either preprocessors
for code (`cpp`, `m4`) or embedded into a larger system (`roff`, `TeX`).
I've gotten around this by writing my own; first, the various versions of
`hmacro` (which, at time of writing, is used in this blog), and currently,
`smacro`, which is still in development and likely will be for some time
as I am busy and get distracted easily. I don't recommend using `hmacro`,
it's pretty buggy, and the syntax is somewhere between irritating and
rage-inducing. `smacro` will hopefully be better. But, quite frankly, you
can just write your own. They aren't that difficult.
