\def{title}{Number representations suck}

# HATE. LET ME TELL YOU HOW MUCH I'VE COME TO HATE NUMERIC REPRESENTATIONS SINCE I BEGAN TO LIVE.

Date: 15 Vent&ocirc;se, 234

If you aren't familiar with the concept of numeric bases, go [here][0], then
come back. I'll wait.

The decimal base that is commonly in use is quite possibly the worst option
for a small base that isn't a prime number. Good bases have many factors
relative to their size, and ten does not. (At least, it is one of the worst;
I imagine [quaternary][1] would be pretty rough as well.) And yet, we all use
it, because we are cursed to have ten digits.

Fortunately, other bases have been proposed. jan Misali's [seximal][2] is my
personal preference, for a whole host of reasons, most of which are enumerated
there. Poke around on that webpage for details. Again, I'll wait. I will also
make note of hexadecimal; it's my second choice behind seximal.

One thing I feel is often left out of discussions of numeric base is numeric
notation. Currently, there is no agreed-upon standard for it; people in some
places use `12,345.123`, others use `12.345,123`, still others use
`12'345,123`, and the ISO standard allows `12 345.123` and `12 345,123`
(preferring the latter). There is also probably more I am unaware of, do send
me an email and I'll add it to the list!

The ISO standards aren't bad. Honestly, practically, they're what I'd
recommend. But, I think it's possible to do better. What about scientific
notation?

The primary annoyance when using scientific notation is that it is tedious to
write. \$1,23 \\cdot 10^{456}\$ is annoying; the digit separator and the
multiplication symbol and the power get in the way. Get rid of these
annoyances, and scientific notation becomes much less awful to deal with.

So, let's take a hint from how computers do scientific notation; more
precisely, how they represent floating point numbers, which are just binary
scientific notation. [IEEE 754][3] can get away with only storing the part of
the significand that is after the digit separator (it's binary, so in
scientific notation, the first digit will always be 1). It also stores an
exponent, and it's implicit that the exponent \$n\$ always implies a
multiplication by \$2^n\$.

The former trick tells us how to get rid of decimal separators. Just omit them
entirely. Of course, unlike IEEE 754, we are stuck storing the first digit in
the significand, but we're still no worse off than present scientific notation.
The latter trick tells us we only need to have some way of telling the
significand and exponent from each other; this whole \$10^n\$ business is
more complex than we need.

Combining these two tricks gives what I call the 123p2 system. Separate the
significand and exponent with some character, in this case `p`, omit the
decimal separator, and implicitly assume that 123p2 actually represents
\$1,23 \\cdot 10^2\$. Admittedly, this is analogous to the 1.23e2 system
already in common use by computer software, but that system is not commonly
written down, and this new system has the benefit of being unambiguous
(there is one and only one way to write a given number).

You could go even further. If writing on paper (and thus not having to
deal with trying to encode an expression into ASCII), \$123\\hat{4}5\$ is
perfectly sensible as notation. A hat is easier to write than a p, and
is more clearly a symbol associated with exponentiation than p is.

Seeing as we're already significantly changing the written format of numbers,
I will also suggest changing the order of digits, making them run least to
most significant. When doing arithmetic manually on paper, it is done starting
with the least-significant digits and moving to the most significant. Swapping
digit order to match the direction of writing makes arithmetic more intuitive;
you just add up the digits as you would read them.

The format wherein digits are written left-to-right, least-to-most significant
I call 321q2. The 123p2 format (right-to-left, least-to-most significant)
should still be an accepted format for right-to-left languages (perhaps it
should be 2p123? Someone who speaks a right-to-left language should probably
weigh in). The hat-notation introduces a complication to this, but generally
speaking there is text surrounding numbers, and the digit order should be
inferrable from context. In cases like computer systems or similar where
inferring digit order is not possible or inconvenient, the hat notation
should be avoided.

Specifically in Arstotzka, the 321a2 format is recognized. This format
functions identically to the 321q2 format, however the significant/exponent
separator differs.

---

While these compressed scientific notations are interoperable with
traditionally-written numbers, I would suggest switching most if not all
representation of numbers to one of these formats. I personally think
scientific notation is significantly easier to deal with than the alternative,
with the possible exception of small numbers 3 digits or less in length.

Credit again to the following folks, who have directly or indirectly
contributed to the existence of this article:

- [jan Misali][2], for introducing me to seximal
- Glory_to_Arstotzka, a friend who helped develop this particular idea

[0]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radix
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternary_numeral_system
[2]: https://www.seximal.net/
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IEEE_754
