\def{title}{Calendars suck}

# come to think of it the gregorian calendar kinda sucks ngl

Date: 18 Vent&ocirc;se 234

Following up on my previous article on [number representations][0], it's about
time I rant a bit about calendars.

The Gregorian calendar is incredibly flawed. Or, rather, it didn't correct
most of the flaws of the Julian calendar.

First, there's no correspondence between the weekday for a given day and the
day of a month for a given day. For example, today is 8 March 2026. It is a
Sunday. Next year, 8 March 2026 will be a Monday. The general rule of thumb
that the weekday increments once per year is a decent rule of thumb, but leap
years complicate this slightly. In any case, it's just an annoyance.

Next, there's the whole leap-year system. The Gregorian calendar is much
better at dealing with drift than the Julian calendar, but it will still drift
over time relative to the tropical year (about 1 day per 3030 years). This is
not ideal, and it's something that should ideally be corrected.

The third problem is the seven-day week. 7 is prime. You can't split a week
into portions with equal numbers of days. This is a tremendous annoyance, and
under the current calendar we simply must put up with it. If the week was 6
days long, it could be easily split into 2-day or 3-day portions as needed;
personally, I see this as ideal. It's similar in length to the current week,
and as such would not be so difficult for people to adjust to. Alternately,
a 10 day week is acceptable as well. It's more compatible with the decimal
system that we all currently use, although it has the problem that the week
would be much longer than the current 7-day week, and that should be mitigated
somehow.

The fourth problem is the assignment of numbers to years. The 1 BCE - 1 CE
transition is quite annoying to deal with; it can occasionally complicate
calculating the years between dates. This should ideally be done away with;
a year should simply be designated as year 0, years before should be negative,
and years after should be positive.

The fifth problem is that the Gregorian calendar is very Earth-specific. It
would be inconvenient on other planets that do not have Earth's day length and
year length.

Not all of these are conveniently solvable, but some definitely are. For
instance, the [French Republican Calendar][2] has 10-day weeks and 30-day
months. This ensures that every day occurs on the same weekday every year,
and it gets rid of the 7-day week, solving 2 of the Gregorian calendar's
issues. To deal with the drift the resultant 360-day calendar would have, five
or six days are added to the end of the year and treated as holidays.

It does also technically solve the issue of leap-years, but its
solution (automatically using 6 days at the end of the year instead of 5
whenever the year gets out of sync) is still flawed; since the length of a
day changes over time it's likely quite difficult to translate dates back in
time. I imagine it would make historical date conversion inconvenient.

Honestly, I think the Gregorian calendar's leap-year system is as good as it
is practical to do. Potentially you could add a leap day every 3200th year or
something similar, but that is a long enough time period that it's quite
reasonable to administer those leap days on an ad-hoc basis going forward and
assume their nonexistence going backwards. The French Republican Calendar
doesn't even address years before year 1 (which began 22 September 1792) to my
knowledge.

One slight downside of the French Republican Calendar is that it starts on a
different day than the Gregorian calendar. However, it does start on the Fall
Solstice, which is a slight benefit. Overall, I consider this more or less
neutral.

To solve the issue of calendars being Earth-specific, dates that need to be
made consistent across planets or dates for people in space should be written
as Julian Dates, perhaps modulo 100 or modulo 1000 for convenience. Any given
planet can have its own calendar if it has seasons.

For Earth, I propose modifying the French Republican Calendar. Keep the
calendar mostly as-is, but replace its leap day method with the leap day
method from the Gregorian calendar, and extend it to years before year 1 by
just decrementing the year (so the year before year 1 is year 0, the one
before is year -1, etc.). This solution allows for 6 or 10 day weeks easily,
since all months are 30 days. For 6 day weeks, the first two days of each
week should be weekends. For 10 day weeks, the first two days as well as the
seventh day of each week should be off days. Ideally the sixth should be off
as well, but we live under capitalism so that may be more difficult to
convince people of. Both of these schedules (either 2-4 for 6-day weeks, or
2-4-1-3 for 10-day weeks) don't increase the actual amount of time off
significantly (ignoring holidays, the standard 7-day week gives workers about
29% of their days off, the 10-day week gives workers 30% of their days off,
and the 6-day week gives 33%), but they do make breaks more frequent, which
should make life less stressful.

This proposed calendar (call it the French Adjusted Calendar) solves problems 1,
3, and 4, the usage of Julian date and local calendars for non-Earth dates
mitigates issue 5. Issue 2 is left unsolved, because the solutions to it
create more problems than they solve. Issue 2 can be solved on an ad-hoc basis
if and when calendar drift becomes a large issue. It's also
mostly-backwards-compatible with the French Republican Calendar, enough so that
I simply use the regular French Republican Calendar on a day-to-day basis (I
am stuck with 7-day weeks, but those aren't any harder to manage with the
Republican calendar than the Gregorian one, so it doesn't matter much). At
some point I may create calendar apps using this Adjusted calendar, at which
point it will become convenient enough to switch to the Adjusted calendar.

A standardized date format is also not a bad idea. I propose replacing the `-`
characters in ISO 8601 dates with `|` characters; this ensures Adjusted dates
are distinguishable from Gregorian dates. Alternately, prefixing the date with
`a` should suffice. Today's date would thus be 0234|06|18, or a0234-06-18. The
latter should only be used when circumstances prevent the former.

[0]: 2026-03-05.html
[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gallic_Wars
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_Republican_calendar
